Add Tokio Bytes post (#16)
model-checking/kani-verifier-blog: _posts/2022-08-17-using-the-kani-rust-verifier-on-tokio-bytes.md

## Diving into `Bytes::BytesMut`

At the bottom of the Tokio stack is the [Bytes](https://github.com/tokio-rs/bytes) library, a _"rich set of utilities for manipulating byte arrays"_, which reflects the fact that networking applications, at their core, have to manipulate byte streams.
Inside the library are two container types:
- `Bytes`: a cheaply cloneable and sliceable chunk of contiguous memory
- `BytesMut`: a unique reference to a (potentially shared) contiguous slice of memory
  
As the names suggest, the bytes pointed to by a `Bytes` instance are immutable whereas they are mutable through a `BytesMut` instance.
In this post we'll focus on `BytesMut`.
Let's start with its definition:

```rust
pub struct BytesMut {
    ptr: NonNull<u8>,
    len: usize,
    cap: usize,
    data: *mut Shared,
}

struct Shared {
    vec: Vec<u8>,
    original_capacity_repr: usize,
    ref_count: AtomicUsize,
}
```

The straightforward part is the first three fields.
Similar to a `Vec<u8>`, we have a pointer `ptr` to the backing buffer of size `cap` bytes with `len` bytes currently in use.
The field `data` is a bit trickier because it handles sharing of the backing buffer.

> In particular, `data` is used to distinguish between two kinds of representation: `KIND_VEC` and `KIND_ARC`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, `data` is used to distinguish between two representation modes: `KIND_VEC` and `KIND_ARC`.
```

Author: Done.

- A `KIND_VEC` is used when the backing buffer is only pointed to by `ptr`.
In this case, `data` is not used as a pointer but instead contains a sentinel value (the bottom bit is set to `'0b1`) to mark that we're using this representation.
- A `KIND_ARC` is used when the backing buffer is shared by multiple `BytesMut` instances.
In this case, each instance's `data` field points to a single `Shared` object whose `ref_count` keeps track of the number of aliases.
In order for this aliasing to be safe, the implementation must ensure that each instance `ptr` field points to a disjoint part of the slice.

> [Additionally, the rules for [pointer alignment](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html#pointers-and-references-layout) ensure that we will never mix up representations (since the bottom bit of a pointer will always be `0`).]

Reviewer 2: This confused me at first, since a pointer could be pointing to a `u8` in which case its bottom bit need not be `0`. I think you mean to say the bottom bit of a pointer to the `Shared` object cannot be 0, since shared has `align > 1`.

Reviewer: We can perhaps add:
```
and the fact that this pointer has an alignment > 1
```
after "Additionally, the rules for pointer alignment" to make it clear.

Author: I removed "(since the bottom bit of a pointer will always be `0`)" and added ",and the fact that `Shared` has `align > 1`, " after "pointer alignment". We can add back the sentence between parentheses if you that will make it clearer.

2. Set `ptr` to point to the `vec`'s buffer ([`as_mut_ptr()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.as_mut_ptr) returns the raw pointer (`*mut u8`) and `vptr()`, an internal function, turns this into a `NonNull<u8>`)
3. Use [`mem::forget`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/fn.forget.html) to ensure that `vec`'s destructor will *not* run when `from_vec` returns (notice that `vec` is moved into `from_vec`).
This is essential to ensure that the buffer pointed to by `ptr` remains valid.
4. Set `data` to `KIND_VEC` (`=0b1`), which is subsequently cast to a raw pointer `*mut Shared`

This is interesting, but unfortunately there is not a great deal more we can say for `is_valid_kind_vec()`.
If we have an instance using `KIND_VEC` then we know that the `ptr` and `cap` must be related to the "original vector".
For example, immediately after construction, we know `ptr` must be exactly `vec`'s buffer and similarly for `cap`.
However, we no longer have access to this `vec`, so for now we will make our well-formedness check a no-op.
[Don't worry, we will return to this later!]

```rust
fn is_valid_kind_vec(&self) -> bool {

>     assert!(self.kind() == KIND_VEC);

Reviewer 2: Should this be an `assert!` or `return false`

Author: There is `match` statement on the higher-level `is_valid` method, so this assert is redundant. It's kept later when `is_valid_kind_vec` is extended, and the assert helps to avoid usage from a generic `BytesMut` object, so I would keep it.

For this reason, we know that `ref_count` *must* be at least `1`.
Secondly, `vec` is the "original vector" that we have derived our instance's slice from.
[We will ignore `original_capacity_repr` which is used to ensure that `reserve` always allocates sufficient bytes.]
Having this "in our hands" is useful because it must be the case that the `ptr` is within `vec`'s buffer, and similarly for capacity.
Putting this together:

```rust
fn is_valid_kind_arc(&self) -> bool {
    assert!(self.kind() == KIND_ARC);
    let shared: *mut Shared = self.data as _;
    unsafe {
        let ref_count = (*shared).ref_count.load(Ordering::Relaxed);
        let valid_ref_count = 1 <= ref_count;

        let vec_ptr = (*shared).vec.as_mut_ptr();
        let vec_cap = (*shared).vec.capacity();
        let vec_end_ptr = vec_ptr.offset(vec_cap as isize);
        let ptr = self.ptr.as_ptr();
        let ptr_in_bounds = vec_ptr <= ptr && ptr <= vec_end_ptr;
        let cap_in_bounds = self.cap <= vec_cap;

        valid_ref_count && ptr_in_bounds && cap_in_bounds
    }
}
```

This gives us an idea!
What if we could keep track of the original vector for `KIND_VEC` too?

> The use of program state that is just for verification is known as *ghost state*, originally called [auxiliary variables](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/360051.360224).

Reviewer 2: Should we note that this will change the layout in Kani

Author: Added ", although it will change the layout in Kani" after "hence has not runtime cost" below, but I'm not sure if that'll be confusing. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe put that as a footnote?

How about proving that the `BytesMut` constructor `with_capacity()` always returns a well-formed instance?
In [earlier posts](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/2022/05/04/announcing-the-kani-rust-verifier-project.html#enter-kani) we introduced Kani [`any<T>()`](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/tutorial-nondeterministic-variables.html).
This is a feature that informally generates "any `T` value".
This is not the same as a randomly chosen concrete value (as in fuzzing) but rather a *symbolic* value that represents any possible value of the appropriate type.
The key idea is that we can use `any` in a Kani harness to verify the behavior of our code with respect to all possible values of an input (rather than having to exhaustively enumerate them).
For example, we can write a harness that uses `any<usize>()` to call `with_capacity` and subsequently assert that the returned `BytesMut` instance is well-formed.

```rust
#[cfg(kani)]
mod verification {
    use super::*;

    #[kani::proof]
    fn with_capacity_returns_well_formed_bytes_mut() {
        let cap = kani::any();
        kani::assume(0 < cap);                       //< (1)

>         kani::assume(    cap < MAX_KANI_ALLOCATION); //< (2)

Reviewer 2: Why the whitespace

Author: Fixed.

    }
}
```

There are two assumptions that we will return to shortly, but first we note Kani has no problem proving this harness:

```bash
$ cargo kani --harness with_capacity_returns_well_formed_bytes_mut --output-format terse
#--snip--
VERIFICATION RESULT: 
 ** 0 of 410 failed

VERIFICATION:- SUCCESSFUL
```

The two assumptions are needed for different reasons.
The first assumption `(1)` avoids constructing a vector with capacity `0`.
This doesn't sound tricky except that the `Vec` implementation uses a dangling pointer to represent vectors with capacity `0`.
And we have an [open question](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/219381-t-libs/topic/Behavior.20of.20dangling.20pointer.20arithmetic.20operations) with the unsafe-wg about what operations are legal on such a dangling pointer.
For now, using this assumption avoids this case.

The second assumption`(2)` is necessary because Kani's abstract machine uses a fixed (but parameterizable) number of bits in a pointer for its analysis (to track allocated objects).
By default, Kani's maximum allocation is `2^47` bytes (whereas the documentation for `vec` states a maximum allocation of `isize::MAX == 2^63 - 1 bytes`).

> Currently Kani does not error if an allocation exceeds this bound so this assumption avoids this case.

Reviewer 2: "does not error"?

Author: Yeah, it just wraps around. Can you review this part to make sure the numbers are alright?

```rust
#[cfg(kani)]
mod verification {
    #[kani::proof]
    fn split_off_maintains_well_formed() {
        let mut a = kani::any();
        let at = kani::any();
        kani::assume(at <= a.capacity()); //< (1)
        let b = a.split_off(at);
        assert!(a.is_valid());
        assert!(b.is_valid());
    }
}
```

We need one more ingredient to make this work.
Unlike uses of `kani::any()` in past blog posts, we need `kani::any()` to return a symbolic *heap-allocated* object for `a` (i.e., the backing buffer pointed to by `buf`).
In this case, Kani provides the [`Arbitrary` trait](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/tutorial-nondeterministic-variables.html).
This requires us to implement `any` to *construct* a symbolic well-formed instance.
In effect, we need to write a "verification-friendly" constructor that uses symbolic values (e.g., for the size of the backing buffer) to call other methods (e.g., `with_capacity()`) to ensure proper heap-allocation.

```rust
#[cfg(kani)]
impl kani::Arbitrary for BytesMut {
    fn any() -> Self {
        let cap = kani::any();
        kani::assume(0 < cap);

>         kani::assume(    cap < MAX_KANI_ALLOCATION);

Reviewer 2: whitespace

Author: Fixed.

In this case, each instance's `data` field points to a single `Shared` object whose `ref_count` keeps track of the number of aliases.
In order for this aliasing to be safe, the implementation must ensure that each instance `ptr` field points to a disjoint part of the slice.
[Additionally, the rules for [pointer alignment](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html#pointers-and-references-layout) ensure that we will never mix up representations (since the bottom bit of a pointer will always be `0`).]

As a user of `BytesMut` you don't need to worry about this distinction.
Under the hood, the implementation will switch representations as required [and, within the library implementation, we can use the private method `kind()` to query the representation of a given instance].
A simplified state machine of when the representation changes is as follows:

```
  │
  │ new()
  ▼
┌──────────┐  split_off()   ┌──────────┐
│ KIND_VEC │ ─────────────► │ KIND_ARC │
└──────────┘                └──────────┘
  ▲                           │
  │                           │
  └───────────────────────────┘
                    reserve()

> ```

Reviewer 3: I'm happy with this diagram, but I am wondering if it might be better to draw it using something other than unicode chars.

Author: Thanks, added an image to replace this diagram. Please take a look!

Reviewer 3: LGTM. If you already have an assets directory, then I think it is fine to put it up there.

For markdown only files, I think something like https://github.blog/2022-02-14-include-diagrams-markdown-files-mermaid/ can be used to avoid pushing images to the repo.
